<pre>
  BIP: XYZ
  Title: Merkle Sum Tree
  Author: Noel Tiernan <tier.nolan@gmail.com>
  Status: Draft
  Type: Standards Track
  Created: 2014-11-03
</pre>

==Abstract==

This BIP describes a proposed hard-fork that uses a sum based Merkle tree instead of the standard one.

==Motivation==

The changes in this BIP improve the ability for SPV (Simple Payment Validation) nodes to audit the blockchain.  
Currently, full nodes validate the entire blockchain and SPV nodes perform no validation.  There is no middle 
ground where an enhanced SPV node can contribute some validation without having to perform full validation.  If
this was made possible then SPV nodes could be configured to contribute some resources to the network.  A smartphone
could be set to contribute CPU power to validate the blockchain when connected to mains power.

Validation by SPV clients requires fraud proofs for every possible violation of the rules of the system [1].  A sum tree
protects against inflation.  The current Merkle tree allows fraud proofs where transactions are not properly signed. 
Spending non-existant outputs requires UTXO set commitments [2], but this is not a hard fork change.

In addition, the proposal made in this BIP improves offline signing efficiency.

==Summary==

The changes in this BIP provide the following benefits

* A SPV client can verify a sub-set of the transactions in a block to verify that no inflation has happened.
* If a SPV client finds fraud, a compact fraud proof could be constructed.
* The size of double spending proofs is reduced for very large transactions.
* By including the input values in the transaction itself, offline signing requires less information to be sent to the signing device.

==Specification==

Beginning at block [SUM_TREE_HEIGHT], blocks must use the Merkle sum tree calculation instead of the current Merkle tree 
calculation.

===Merkle Sum Tree Hash===

Definitions
    
    LE(x, size) is the little endian byte array representation of x of the given size
    DSHA256(b) is the 32 byte digest given by double hashing b with the SHA256 hash function
    {a | b} is the concatenation of the a and b byte arrays

The Merkle sum tree hash takes an array of 40 byte digests and produces a 32 byte digest.  The input digests consists of two parts, an
eight byte value and a 32 byte sub-digest.

    {LE(value, 8) | (32 Byte sub-digest)}

As with normal Merkle trees, digests are processed in pairs to give a single digest.  If there is an odd number of digests in the
round, then the last digest is duplicated and appended to the array.  The parent digest is computed from its two child digests (left and right).

    parent.digest = {LE(left.value + right.value, 8) | DSHA256(left.digest | right.digest)}

This process is repeated until there is a single digest remaining.

The final digest is generated from the root of the Merkle tree.

    merkle_sum_digest = DSHA256(root.digest)

This digest is used in place of the Merkle root field in the header.

====Transaction Digest====

40 byte digests are generated for each transaction in the block.  These digests are used as the leaves for the Merkle sum tree.

The transaction digest uses Merkle sum digests for the inputs and the outputs.

    transaction.digest = {LE(mint_fee + inputs.value - outputs.value, 8) | 
                          DSHA256(LE(tx_version, 4) | inputs.digest | outputs.digest | LE(locktime, 4))}

Note:  The mint fee is zero for non-coinbase transactions

====Input Digest====

A 40 byte digest is generated for each input.  These digests are the leaves of the inputs Merkle sum tree.

The txin data format is modified by this BIP.  This is necessary so that the transaction digest can be generated from
information contained within the transaction.

An extra value field is added to the txin data structure.

{|class="wikitable"
! Field Size !! Description !! Data type !! Comments
|-
| 32 || previous_output || char[32] || The TXID of the transaction containing the previous output
|-
| 4 || index || uint32_t || The index of the previous output
|-
| 8 || value || int64_t || The value of the previous output (New)
|-
| 1+ || script length || var_int || The length of the scriptSig
|-
| ? || script || char[script_length] || The scriptSig
|-
| 4 || sequence || uint32_t || The sequence number for tx replacement
|}

The scriptSig array is hashed before being included in the calculations for the sub-digest.

    input.digest = {LE(value, 8) | DSHA256(previous_output | LE(index, 4) | LE(value, 8) | DSHA256(script) | LE(sequence, 4))}

====Output Digest====

As with the inputs, the digests for the outputs of the transaction are the leaves of the Merkle sum tree.

The format of the transaction outputs is unchanged.

{|class="wikitable"
! Field Size !! Description !! Data type !! Comments
|-
| 8 || value || int64_t || The value of the output
|-
| 1+ || script length || var_int || The length of the scriptPubKey
|-
| ? || script || char[script_length] || The scriptPubKey
|}

As with the input digests, the scriptPubKey is hashed before being included in the calculation for the sub-digest.

    output.digest = {LE(value, 8) | DSHA256(LE(value, 8) | DSHA256(script)}

====Notes====

Since the var_ints for the input and output counts and the script lengths do not affect the Merkle root, 
minimal length encoding of the lengths must be used when computing the txid values.

===Signatures===

The transaction serialization is changed by this BIP and signatures should use the updated serialization.

===Merkle Blocks===

Merkle blocks are blocks which only contain some of the transactions.  They allow nodes to prove to SPV clients
that a particular transaction exists in a block without sending the entire block.  They are part of the Bloom
filtering system [3].

The changes to the Merkle tree in this BIP mean that extra data is required.  A new field is added to the merkleblock
message.  This field must be included for blocks beginning at [SUM_TREE_HEIGHT] and should be ignored for blocks 
before that point.

{|class="wikitable"
! Field Size !! Description !! Data type !! Comments
|-
| 4 || version || uint32_t || Block version information, based upon the software version creating this block
|-
| 32 || prev_block || char[32] || The hash value of the previous block this particular block references
|-
| 32 || merkle_root || char[32] || The reference to a Merkle tree collection which is a hash of all transactions related to this block
|-
| 4 || timestamp || uint32_t || A timestamp recording when this block was created (Limited to 2106!)
|-
| 4 || bits || uint32_t || The calculated difficulty target being used for this block
|-
| 4 || nonce || uint32_t || The nonce used to generate this block… to allow variations of the header and compute different hashes
|-
| 4 || total_transactions || uint32_t || Number of transactions in the block (including unmatched ones)
|-
| ? || hashes || uint256[] || sub-digest in depth-first order (including standard varint size prefix)
|-
| ? || flags || byte[] || flag bits, packed per 8 in a byte, least significant bit first (including standard varint size prefix)
|-
| ? || values || uint64[] || little endian values in depth-first order (including standard varint size prefix) (New)
|}

The 40 byte digest can be generated from the hashes and the values field.

    digest = {values[i] | hashes[i]}

==Rationale==

The primary improvement from this BIP is that inflation can be detected without having to examine entire blocks.

The extension of the merkle system to individual inputs and outputs means that double spending proofs are made more compact.
A double spend proof requires paths to both transaction that have spent the output.  Both transactions must be 
included in the fraud proof since they are the leaves of the Merkle tree.  This means that the fraud proof would be at least as
large as the transactions.  With the tree configured as given in this BIP, the merkle path continues to each output.

The scripts are hashed before including them in the input and output sub-digests.  This means that fraud proofs don't need
to include the entire scripts in proofs relating to those inputs and outputs.  Again this reduces the potential for very
large proofs if the scripts are large.


==Backwards Compatibility==

This is hard fork change.  Legacy clients will not accept blocks produced in accordance with this BIP.

It is hoped that it could be included with the block size hard fork.

The [SUM_TREE_HEIGHT] value should be set to the same block that the block size fork takes effect.

Legacy transactions cannot be converted into the new serialization format automatically because signatures would
be affected.  Clients should allow replacement of transactions in their memory pools with replacement transactions
that are correctly signed with the new format.

==Reference Implementation==

TBD

== References ==

[1] https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=131493.msg1411354#msg1411354

[2] https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=137933.msg1596626#msg1596626

[3] BIP-37

==Copyright==

This document is placed in the public domain.

